* WinEdt News.txt
Last modified on Tuesday, April 29, 2008  16:19
__________________________________________________________________


WinEdt 5.6: a beta version of the next official release!

------------------------------------------------------------------

WinEdt 5 [Build 20080429 (v. 5.6)] (Beta 1)
===========================================

- The Accessories menu for MiKTeX and TeX Live Configuration
has been redone. Console applications now call new common
macros in Exec\TeX folder. A new macro ExeCompiler.edt in Exec
folder takes care of actual execution as defined in the
Execution Modes. By default console applications run in
WinEdt's Console docked at the bottom of WinEdt's Window. The
appearance and position of this Window can be adjusted through
the Appearance| Docking and Highlighting| Forms Dialogs (just
like Tree and Gather Control). Visibility of WinEdt console can
be toggled through a new menu item in the Accessories Menu
(Ctrl+Shift+C).

  Note that Console allows keyboard input. When Activated and
  Focused it captures keyboard input. To give focus back to the
  Active MDI Window, use ESC key of click on the text or use
  Ctrl+Shift+C to hide and disable the console. Only one
  application at the time can be run in WinEdt's Console (which
  is usually what you want when you are compiling a TeX
  Document).

Execution Modes dialog allows you to change default properties
pertaining to the execution of TeX accessories. In particular,
you can disable the "WinEdt Console" option and press "Apply to
All" button to establish previous mode of execution using a
separate Windows Console. For some applications this may be a
preferred method... At this stage it is up to beta testers to
experiment and provide feedback and solutions. My testing with
MiKTeX 2.7 and TeX Live 2007 did not reveal any problems with
the new default settings.

- The accessories menu and toolbar contains "Compile" and
"Compile Selected" items (F9 and Shift+F9). At the moment these
two items can be configured in the Execution Modes (compile to
dvi, ps or pdf and use 3 different methods to create pdf).
Advanced users may take a look at the macros that do the job
(the same set is used for MiKTeX and TeX Live) and come up with
improvements and new ideas how to quickly configure these two
items. The "Compile" item should be defined for the most common
kind of compilation that you encounter for your work. That may
vary from one user to another...

- It is not required that TeXify item in the accessories menu
contains texify.exe as an executable (in particular, TeX Live
has no texify.exe!). You could specify your favorite TeX
Compiler (eg. xelatex.exe) and possibly enable 3 custom
iterations in the Execution Modes to let WinEdt's Macro run
BibTeX and MakeIndex up to 3 times (as required to get compiled
document up-to-date).

- Redirection of TeX Aux files to another folder may not work
with all accessories and TeX Systems (this was also the case in
5.5). It assumes that they support *-directory=dir switches and
that Aux folder already contains subfolders for documents
placed relative to the main file. If you encounter problems
with this you should consult the macros and the documentation/
help for TeX accessory in question and see if you can come up
with an elegant solution (eg. by using the command prompt to
achieve what you want). And if it cannot be done than you'll
have to give up this feature or resort to some brute force
solution in order to allow such accessory process files in
"remote/non-default" folders... If you cannot find the way to
accomplish the task from the Command Prompt then it is unlikely
that a WinEdt macro can do anything about it!

- Toolbar has been slightly modified / rearranged and images
used in the default settings have been "enhanced" with gradient
brush. This should give slightly better appearance on Vista
although you should not compare it to the appearance of Office
2007. WinEdt does not have that kind of resources to put into
the appearance and professional design of GUI. Even the current
improvements require your computer to support 24 or 32 bit
bitmaps or else the new icons may look worse than the simple
16-color old ones. Keep this in mind if you are considering
upgrading on an old machine...

- WinEdt Macro engine was subject to substantial changes that
were required to accommodate and ever increasing number of
macro functions. The old case sentence executing code on the
stack was stretched to the limit and something had to be done
about it. The users should not notice any difference except for
improved macro execution speed and performance. Just in case
you should know this as it is always possible that some
unintentional change in the behavior of macro scripts might
result from this... If so, we'll deal with it.

- New macros for execution of console applications (inside
WinEdt's Interface):

  RunConsole("Command","Folder","Caption", no_Reset,no_Show: 0..1);
  SetConsoleText("Text", GOTO_End,Append: 0..1);
  GetConsoleText(Register: 0..9);
  SetConsoleInfo("Info Caption");
  GetConsoleInfo(Register: 0..9);
  ShowConsole(Visible: -1..1, test_Visibility: 0..1);
  FocusConsole(Focused: -1..1, test_Focus: 0..1);
  ResetConsole;
  IfConsoleRunning("Then Macro","Else Macro");

- ShowExecutionModes macro function has been stripped of
parameters for extra files that are no longer used (not
compatible with the old one!!!):

  ShowExecutionModes('Execution Modes - MiKTeX',>
    '%b\Exec\MiKTeX\ExeMode.edt',>
    '%b\Exec\MiKTeX\ExeMode_Backup.edt',>
    '%b\Exec\MiKTeX\ExeMode_Custom.edt',>
    '%b\Exec\MiKTeX\ExeMode_Default.edt',>
      1); // Extended Mode with Extra Pages for TeX System and TeX Output

- Execution Modes Interface has been redone to allow new
options with WinEdt console execution.

- New macro to remove extra/ redundant spaces from the command
line (except inside double-quotes):

  TrimCommandLine("Command", Register: 0..9);

- Search -> Hide Errors Menu Command (CtrL+Shift+E) now hides
the console as well:

  ShowErrorLog(0);ShowConsole(-1);

- Tree and Gather interface now allows some extended processing
and specifications in order to include more useful information
pertaining to Bibliography Items:

    EXTENDED="@{}()\"
    EXITEMS="author,title,year,@"
    EXLINELIMIT=16
    CAPTION="%?: %!?"

If you don't want this in the Tree or Gather comment out this
lines and use

    CAPTION="%?"

to display only bib label. Extra processing might be a bit
slower in huge bibliography files (data bases). In Gather form
docked at the bottom long captions with Author, Title,... make
sense.

- Macro GDIPopup has an extra 0..1 parameter. Specify 1 if you
want extended Bib Captions in this interface (response to
\cite{}). Extended captions must be enabled for Gather
interface or else GDIPopup interface always shows short
captions.

- A new Global Options under the [ENVIRONMENTS] section:

  WRAP_SOFT_COMMENTS=0 // Do not Wrap Comments in Soft Mode!

This property is automatically on in Semi-Soft Wrapping (where
wrapping such lines would cause problems with compilation!).

- Tree Branches now allow specification of # which is expanded
to the number of items inside. For Example:

  BRANCH="Bibliography (# Items)"

Repeat ## twice to include character # in this string (if
required).

- Input Directives (Tree.ini) now allow specification of the
CAPTION. Advanced users can change the way the filename will
appear in the tree (eg. by stripping off the PATH or Filetype
similar to the FILENAME directive). Custom processing takes
place after FILENAME has been processed. %? refers to the
unprocessed caption (filename)...

- New Switch for comments in LaTeX Documents:

  \begin{comment} .... \end{comment}

- New Switch for verbatim: \verb/?/...

- A few enhancements to MUI (including multiple selections in
list boxes as documented in Macro Manual).

- HTML Compiler now calls TtH for TeX Mode (before it was
disabled for this mode and it only worked for HTML Help Files).

- WinEdt now comes with LaTeX Help e-book (HTML File with
documentation for LaTeX and other TeX Accessories). WinEdt's
Help Menu has an interface for it in its Help Menu...

==================================================================

Bug Fixes:
==========

- A problem with finding files in the project tree when PATH is
being used in WinEdt's Input Directives has been fixed. GetTree
macro now correctly qualifies such files (as do other functions
that depend on such files such as FindInFiles).

- \#{...} and \#~{...} RegEx filters now allows expressions
that span over one line if the expression contains > or **.

- A Bug with \# RegEx in FindInString has been fixed.

- A caret if now properly positioned when large extra line
spacing is specified in Preferences| Font Dialog...

- A bug for LstGetItem has been fixed (it now correctly returns
an item as specified by the index parameter).

- Word Count now properly ignores text in softly wrapped
comments (bug fix)...

- A delimiter matching bug with (unlikely) constructions like
$\$$ or $$\$$$ has been fixed.

- WinEdt (in the background) is now properly displayed in the
taskbar on Vista even if it is running a modal dialog...

- Windows Classic Appearance Fixes:
  - Unwanted Horizontal Bar no longer appears when not
    unnecessary in softly wrapped documents!
  - A Refresh Oddity with Document Tabs after WinEdt has been
    resized has been fixed.

==================================================================

Todo List for this version:
===========================

- todo: SetFontSize macro...

- todo: MoveLine Up or Down Macro...

- todo: Revisit Word Left and Right Commands (like word!)?

- todo: Revisit GlobalReturn responses in Tree.

- todo: Update Help and Macro Manual

  (including Keywords and Macro Dictionary)

  InsLine(4); // to be Documented...

- todo: Finish the "darn" Environments...
  // One day .....................................................
  SPELLING_MODE                                                 19
  SPELLING                                                      20
  HIGHLIGHTING_MODE                                             21
  HIGHLIGHTING                                                  22
  FONT_MODE                                                     23

==================================================================

Then tackle folding for 5.7....

__________________________________________________________________


WinEdt 5 [Build 20071003 (v. 5.5)] (Official Release)
=====================================================

(see History.txt)...

__________________________________________________________________


The file "...WinEdt\Doc\History.txt" contains a complete
history of additions and fixes since the release of WinEdt32
(from Y2K on)...

__________________________________________________________________
